Hurricane Monitoring and Evacuation Optimization System

Project Goals
Monitor real-time hurricane data (such as wind speed, trajectory, and category).
Predict hurricane paths using data analysis and forecasting models.
Optimize evacuation routes and highlight safe zones for affected populations.

Key Features

Hurricane Monitoring:
Collect real-time data from public APIs like NOAA or OpenWeatherMap.

Path Prediction:
Use historical data and machine learning models to forecast the hurricane’s path.

Evacuation Planning:

Integrate geographical data to optimize evacuation routes based on traffic and shelter locations.
Provide step-by-step navigation instructions.
Interactive User Interface:

Visualize hurricane data and routes using tools like Plotly or Dash.
Provide notifications and alerts for updates.

Background Information
Hurricanes are among the most devastating natural disasters, causing widespread destruction to infrastructure, loss of life, and disruption of communities. Their unpredictability and intensity make them a significant challenge for disaster management and relief efforts. Imrpoving hurricane tracking and evacuation planning are critical for minimizing damage and ensuring public safety.
Existing solutions often focus on either monitoring hurricanes or providing evacuation routes, but few integrate these functionalities into a comprehensive system. Moreover, as urban areas grow and climate change contributes to more intense hurricanes, the need for innovative, efficient, and accessible solutions becomes more of a priority.
This project is meaningful because of its real world impact through disaster management, hurricane monitoring, and safe evacuation planning.
This project is also novel for its integration of these features, its prediction analysis, and its user-friendly accessibility.

Installation and usage instructions

First step is to call log_event to record the hurricane by using this command for an example

system.log_event("Category 4 hurricane detected near Florida.")
system.log_event("Hurricane downgraded to Category 3.")

Then manage the evac routes by these commands

system.add_evacuation_route("Route A: Coastal to Inland")
system.add_evacuation_route("Route B: Northern Highway")

system.next_evacuation_route()

Then graph the hurricane paths and their connections with this command

system.add_hurricane_path("Florida", "Georgia")
system.add_hurricane_path("Georgia", "South Carolina")

system.display_hurricane_path()

Last step is to display the logs with this command

system.display_logs()



Code structure

Main Module
└── HurricaneManagement
    ├── LinkedList (Event Log)
    │       └── Node
    ├── EvacuationQueue (Routes)
    │       └── deque (Python's deque)
    ├── MinHeap (Rescue Ops)
    │       └── heapq (Python's heap)
    ├── Graph (Hurricane Path)
    │       └── Adjacency List
    └── Stack


Flow Chart

https://imgur.com/a/v1ii0Zl  
 
Achievement of project goals

Project Goals -

Monitor Real-Time Hurricane Data:
Accurately fetch and display current hurricane information.
Predict Hurricane Paths:
Use machine learning to forecast future hurricane trajectories.

Optimize Evacuation Routes:
Calculate safe and efficient evacuation routes.

User-Friendly Interface:
Provide an interactive and accessible tool for users.


Discussions and Conclusions

Project issues -
Issues we ran into with the project is the availability of data. For some of the real time data sources, there is a subscription required. The accuracy of the application is also an issue because it is difficult for the program to predict and forecast over 48 hours. The limitations of the application include its predictability because it mainly accounts for historical data and future hurricanes can change due to the climate impact.

Course learning applied -
Throughout this project we used and applied what we learned from this course to includ basic data structure understanding, and how to install and run applications in python. 


